---
title: A college student's kitchen survival kit
description: >
    A short list of kitchen things that have become indispensable for me
slug: college-student-kitchen-survival-kit
layout: post
date: 2014-05-13
---

Since moving out on my own there have been a few pieces of kitchenware that have
become indispensable to me. From making coffee in the morning to cooking dinner,
these are the things that I would buy again in a heartbeat if I were starting
over.

### Cast-iron pan

I picked [mine][target] up at Target for around $25. Cheaper versions abound,
and should be relatively easy to find at a garage sale or similar. It's been a
fantastic investment, and I use it for almost every bit of cooking I do. It's
easy to clean and easy to cook with, partly due to the predictable heating
cycle.

[target]: http://www.target.com/p//-/A-10291923

### Rice cooker

I'd never used a rice cooker before moving out, but one of my first roommates
used his all the time. When I moved to my current apartment it was one of the
first things I bought. Mine cost $40, and I don't recommend paying much more
than that unless you know why you're doing so.

A $20 bag of rice lasts me close to 4 months, and it's one of the easiest parts
of a meal to make. The cooker can keep it warm for ~12 hours (there's
technically no upper limit as far as I'm aware, but my ex-roommate cautioned me
against keeping it warm for longer than that), and you can always put it in the
fridge for lunch the next day.

### French press (or an aeropress)

I own and use a French press for making coffee. It's just about the easiest way
of making coffee, and it's infinitely more sustainable (both economically and
environmentally) than the Keurig pods.

>Many coffee [fanatics][] will claim that an AeroPress produces a better cup,
>but the fiddliness associated with it is not worth it to me. If getting the
>best brew matters to you, you can invest in both an AeroPress and a [decent
>grinder][grinder].

[fanatics]: http://www.marco.org/2014/03/31/throwing-k-cups-in-glass-houses
[grinder]: http://www.sweetmarias.com/sweetmarias/grinders/electric-grinders/virtuoso-conical-burr-mill.html

### Electric kettle

I've got a nondescript red electric kettle that I use for boiling water for
coffee, tea, and pasta. It's not a huge part of my day, but I can't imagine
living without one.

### Food storage containers

I have [these][food-storage] containers for food storage. They're glass, which
means they don't bend or morph in the dishwasher. The lids have a satisfying
click when attached and the base can be put in the microwave with no worries
about chemicals leaking into the foods.

I don't have any real preference for a specific brand. Anything that offers
tempered glass and snap lids is probably going to do a great job.

>As a baseline, I only end up using about 4 or 5 of these on a regular basis. If
>you can find someone to split a full set with it becomes a lot more financially
>reasonable.

[food-storage]: http://www.amazon.com//dp/B00BSZJYY4

### Spatula

I use [this][spatula] almost every time I cook. If I don't, it's because it's in
the dishwasher. In fact, I'm ordering a second right now.

[spatula]: http://www.amazon.com//dp/B000S17X6A/

### Cookbook

[This][cookbook] is one of the few cookbooks I own. It's absolutely fantastic as
it contains not just a set of recipes, but a set of cooking guidelines. It
includes gems like making your own pesto, essentials like how to make hardboiled
eggs, and important ones like how to sear a steak. This is my go-to gift for
people moving out for the first time.

[cookbook]: http://www.howtocookeverything.com/products/0764578650

Wrap-up
-------
This really is my core setup. Almost all of these things get used every day, and
if I had to start my kitchen over I'd buy every one of these first.
